The Request and Response Cycle



    As we start to build out web applications, it is important to be able to visualize the way information flows through the system; typically called the Request/Response Cycle.

First a user gives a client a URL, the client builds a request for information (or resources) to be generated by a server. When the server receives that request, it uses the information included in the request to build a response that contains the requested information. Once built, that response is sent back to the client in the requested format, to be rendered to the user.

It is our job as web developers to build out and maintain servers that can successfully build responses based on standardized requests that will be received. But, what does a standard request look like? We need to know that before we can start building servers that will respond successfully.

The standard, or protocol we use is HTTP.

HTTP Requests and Responses


The HyperText Transfer Protocol gives us rules about how messages should be sent around the Internet. The system that initiates a connection sends a “request”, and the system the answers sends a “response”.

HTTP Request


When a “client” (like a web browser) retrieves information, it sends a payload of data to a server as a “request”. This request has many parts, but for now we are going to focus on the verb and path.

Verb and Path


Every request needs to be able to tell a server what information is requested and how that information is being requested. The what is the path (also know as a URI), indicating what resource this request is referencing.

Examples of a path:

/tasks
/tasks/4
/items/6/reviews

The how is the verb, indicating what actions the server should take regarding the requested resource. While the path can vary greatly based on the application, the verbs follow common patterns. There are 5 common HTTP verbs:

GET - retrieve some information to be READ by the client/user
POST - CREATE a new resource with information contained in the request
PUT - UPDATE an entire resource with information contained in the request
PATCH - UPDATE a part of a resource with information contained in the request
DELETE - DESTROY a resource, typically indicating that it is removed from the database
With these 5 verbs, we send requests that allow us to perform all CRUD functions (create, read, update, destroy) for resources in a database!

Checks for Understanding


Describe the HTTP request/response cycle. Use each of the following terms:
User
Client
Server
Request
Response
HTTP
What is a path?
What is a verb?
What are the 5 common http verbs and what do they do?